---
Title: Managing Manifests and Distributing Datasets
Date: 09.01.2019
Author: Jackson Brown, Allen Institute for Cell Science
Corresponding Author Email: jacksonb@alleninstitute.org
---

# Managing Manifests and Distributing Datasets

## Abstract

Machine learning and computational modeling methods are increasingly used in both science and industry. A core component of computational modeling research ~~as with all research,~~ is the affordability and ease of reproducing the results found by an experiment. To ease the challenge of reproducibility, sharing of the dataset used to produce the results of an experiment is commonplace. [The two preceeding sentences need to be better aligned... an experiment is economical...but what does this have to do with sharing of a dataset?] Methods for managing and distributing these datasets are inappropriate for imaging datasets however because they commonly resemble a manifest and require additional packaging and organization than their feature set counterparts.

Quilt3Distribute (Q3D) is a software application that attempts to alleviate the many of challenges found when managing and distributing manifest style datasets which can be made of up thousands of individual files. Developed and used at the Allen Institute for Cell Science to manage and distribute the terabyte size imaging datasets used by biologists, computational and non-computational alike. [This two sentence description is good... I would consider removing the first paragraph and just going with this] 

## Manifests

It is not clear how to store a dataset that may be made up of thousands of files and accompanying metadata. [State this as a challenge ... "There are many ways to store a dataset made up of thousands of files, but many of these options have steep associated costs.] Containerization of data has been a common theme in recent years with distributing datasets [2, 4]. For example, geospatial scientists and engineers have been creating file formats, data packaging tools, and distribution systems for many years to solve these exact problems which have ultimately established standards for the packaging and distribution of their fields datasets [4]. Following suit, our proposal for storage and distribution of manifest style datasets uses a software package that falls under the containerization umbrella. "Quilt" is a software package that adds a number of features to current state of the art storage systems (e.g. Amazon's S3) [3]. Of note: Quilt versions dataset containers (what Quilt refers to as data packages), a desired feature for the computational sciences resource stack as versioned file storage supports the goal for having each experiment be easily reproducible.

## Implementation

This project expands on state of the art methods by specifically targeting the distribution of manifest style datasets. For most computational modeling scientists at the Allen Institute for Cell Science, datasets are commonly tabular, with a column, or multiple columns, filled with file paths to larger resources (images). The rest of the tabular dataset is largely metadata about the files referenced in each row. To expand on the state of the art, our Python package attaches the metadata from columns found in a tabular manifest style dataset to each file found in the manifest before distributing them with Quilt.

To help the end user of the dataset, our package additionally cleans and standardizes the metadata it finds. A few examples of these cleaning and validation behaviors are:

1) Asserting or casting all values in a metadata column are that of the most common data type for that metadata column.
(Ex: if the values "4" (integer four), "1" (integer one), and "'4'" (string four) exist in the same column, the application attempts to cast the instance of the string four to the columns most common data type: an integer)

2) Enforcing that every file path found exists prior to attempting distribution. (Commonly, when collaboratively working on shared datasets, files will move to a new location during the process of development.)

Learning from the extensive work in linked data, retention of file associations [why not just say provenance?] is an incredibly valuable tool for not only navigation between objects but also the relationships between those objects[1]. To apply these linked data concepts in our own application, if a manifest has multiple columns that contain file paths to resources, our application additionally constructs a lookup table for those shared file associations and places the relevant portion of the lookup table in each file's metadata. An example of this behavior can be seen when an imaging manifest has a column for full size images and a column for thumbnail images. For each row of the manifest, the application makes an entry in the Quilt package that pairs the full size image to the smaller thumbnail image by storing the read path to the other in the metadata for each member of the pair.

[Add something about where you are in the development process... Are you at a prototype phase, are you in beta, etc... You might also say something about next steps or immediate future work...]

Quilt3Distribute (Q3D) is an open-source Python application and additional details can be found at: https://github.com/AllenCellModeling/quilt3distribute

## Acknowledgements

We wish to thank the Allen Institute for Cell Science founder, Paul G. Allen, for his vision, encouragement, and support. This work could not have been completed without the additional support and input from all members of the AllenInstitute for Cell Science modeling team.

## References

1. Auer, S. (2011). The emerging web of linked data. Proceedings of the 2011 International Conference on Intelligent Semantic Web-Services and Applications - ISWSA 11. doi: 10.1145/1980822.1980823
2. Bigdely-Shamlo, N., Makeig, S., & Robbins, K. A. (2016). Preparing Laboratory and Real-World EEG Data for Large-Scale Analysis: A Containerized Approach. Frontiers in Neuroinformatics, 10. doi: 10.3389/fninf.2016.00007
3. Karve, A., Moore, K., Ryazanov, D., & Mochalov, A. (2018). Retrieved from open.quiltdata.com
4. Pons, X., & Masó, J. (2016). A comprehensive open package format for preservation and distribution of geospatial data and metadata. Computers & Geosciences, 97, 89–97. doi: 10.1016/j.cageo.2016.09.001
